---
layout: post
title: Bidirectional Text in WebVTT
tags:
- mozilla
- seneca college
- open-source
- cdot
---

Recently we had to implement the Unicode Bidrectional Algorithm's Paragraph
Level steps in the JS WebVTT parser. What this basically boils down to is being
able to detect the text directionality of the first paragraph in a WebVTT cue
so that we can set the appropriate CSS and do the appropriate positioning for
a cue's CSS box on the video.

The reason for this is that in the current spec text directionality is tied to
the anchor position for other values such as the position cue-setting. For
example:

    WEBVTT
    
    00:01.000 --> 00:02.000 position:25% align:end
    &amp;rlm;

Would have text aligned to the left **(because the end of text flowing right
to left is the left)** and positioned 25% of the width of the video over from the
right side of the video **(because our anchor point is the right side of the video
since the text flows right to left)**.

And:

    WEBVTT
    
    00:01.000 --> 00:02.000 position:25% align:end
    &amp;lrm;

Would have text aligned to the right side of the video and be positioned 25% of
the width of the video from the left edge.

Confusing thing is that this doesn't apply to vertically positioned cues in the
current spec. Which doesn't quite make sense to me.

This might be removed in the coming changes to the spec. Following along on the
[bug](https://www.w3.org/Bugs/Public/show_bug.cgi?id=20037) to redesign the
positioning mechanism there is a push to separate the text alignment from text
directionality and I'm hoping there will be one to separate the position
cue-setting from text directionality as well since in my opinion it's confusing
to have to flip the reference point for it when dealing with different text
directionalities. Position should be about setting the offset of the box, not
of the text.

We went through a number of possible solutions to solve this problem the first
of which was using [Twitter's JS implementation](https://github.com/twitter/twitter-cldr-js)
of the Unicode Bidrectional Algorithm. Which seemed to be the canonical version
of the JS implementation. However, we had a problem with this. The Twitter
implementation requires you to know the locale beforehand as you need to
generate a JS file, with all the necessary code, for a particular locale. You
can't separate the code from the locale or have a general version for detecting
all text directionality in all languages. The other problem was that this is a
complete implementation of the algorithm and spec. We only need a very small
part.

Going though other options--using Gecko's was not an option as it's not exposed
to chrome JS yet and we don't really see a need to do it--it seemed like the best
thing would be to implement it ourselves since it's so small.

To do this I compiled a list of all strong RTL **(right-to-left)** characters by
modifying the [Unicode Data Table](http://www.unicode.org/Public/UNIDATA/UnicodeData.txt)
and just made a small function to loop through the characters in the cue's first
paragraph and if we find a strong RTL character then we know the text is
RTL. It's interesting since this isn't actually what the spec wants us
to do. The spec wants us to return on the first strong directional character
whether it is LTR **(left-to-right)** or RTL, but [:smontagu ](http://smontagu.org/)
commented that this might actually be better for WebVTT's implementation which
surprised me. He also said another surprising thing to me which was that
algorithms like this are not always 100% correct--a thought which had never
occured to me before... *ponders*.

If you'd like to check out the code that does this you can check it out here
[in vtt.js](https://github.com/andreasgal/vtt.js/blob/e495e1b76e89a8b2b7a76cfe99a1af7b321062b5/vtt.js#L523).









